Now we're going to start with GPU
architecture one. Now I intentionally
selected GPU architecture because in
some sense GPU architectures are easier
um than there the the optimization that
GPU applies are more intuitive. So we're
going to talk about GPU architecture.
Now I'm going to mainly take three
lectures to for GPU architecture. Then
uh although the second and the third
will probably give you some preview for
what's going on in the rest of the
semester that some details will be
discussed in the rest of the semester.
Uh but there are only previews there are
rather relatively easy concepts there.
Okay, I will explain those in the second
and third lecture. Then later on when we
talk of CPU we will see how a comp more
complex version is implemented in CPU.
So let's give a quick review and talk
about parallelism. So last time we
talked about sequential logic, right? So
in sequential logic every circuit
element is either a register or
combination logic. Then um at least the
one circuit element is a register. So
there are registers and all registers
receive the same clock signal. There is
the cyclic path contains at least one
register. So that's a simple very simple
uh sequential logic. Now if we use a
state map what we're basically designing
is what is shown at here one group or
register a few bits a combination logic
right. So since we are saying with
kernel map we probably can only do like
four variable
uh four pin four wires optimization. or
register can only have four um values.
That's the limitation that we can do
hand simp uh der derivation. But in
reality things are much more complex and
in real hardware there are just a ton of
combination logic, a ton of registers.
then
it's just not as simple as one
register and one combination logic since
there are so many combination logic and
if you consider this if there's a clock
signal if the register updates its data
all this combination logic will
automatically trigger no automatically
calculate the result for next cycle
so there creates a intrinsic conflict
Then for human understanding then this
is a code that we write. There's a if
statement. There's a for loop that we do
first thing then we do second thing then
we do one after another. Right? This is
human understand the word by sequential
like we do this first and then do next
do do next thing. But
so human has a zero thinking or
sequential thinking. Now but digital
circuit has parallel execution. There
are so many combination logic and those
same combination logic can do
calculation and to do logic operations
at the same time. So if we only do one
instruction at a time, say there's a add
operation for example. If there's a add
operation,
then we're only using one combination
logic, we're wasting all the combination
logic and the registers in our whole
chip, right? So then
pretty much for the whole rest of this
course is about addressing this
conflict. It's about how we can
write a serial program at least a
program that human can understand then
use something use some either
programmer aware techniques like GPU
programming or some programmer
transparent methods like how CPU is
optimizing the code to achieve parallel
execution.
Okay. So there are different method to
support parallel execution for a serial
program. Now we call this parallelism.
Different type of parallelisms for
example it's just different ways to use
hardware parallel hardware. We have task
parallelism
um that may do like this more easy to
understand right one program is a
browser one program is a word processor.
They're doing different task and they
can run in parallel. That's okay. Then
we have data level parism, thread level
parism and instruction level
parallelism. So for GPUs we're going to
talk about data parallelism, data level
parism, thread level parallelism. And
for CPUs we're mainly going to talk
about instruction level parism. It
doesn't mean GPU doesn't use instruction
level parism. We'll talk about how GPU
use par instruction parallelism in
Thursday's class. But mainly GPU takes
care mainly GPU uses data level par and
thread level parism. And also if you
consider CPU early days prior to 2000
right by that time everyone thinking oh
we just increase frequency increase
frequency then we can get the really
really fast G CPUs then what happened is
when the frequency is just getting too
high they just realize it generates too
much heat then there's no way just to
continue the performance scaling there's
no way to continue improve the CPU
performance by increasing frequency. So
what they are doing is just in
introduced the multi-core CPU, right? So
what paralism is multi-core CPU is
utilizing is pretty much data
task parallelism and thread parism,
thread level parism, right? And also you
can also say there's data level parism
in those cases if the pro the program is
suitable. Okay, so CPU and GPU utilizing
this this type of parism in different
ways in different levels.
GPU cares more about data parism and
thread level parism. CPU cares more on
instruction level parism. And I
intentionally didn't write data parism.
So data level parism and data parism
typically there are two words in
different scope. Data parism is a
machine learning training terminology
that we use multiple GPUs to do
training. Then the data is aggregated
together. And when we talk about data
level parism is more like micro
architecture concept that we talk about
uh how the internal threads and the data
organized.
Okay. So we understand the paralisms
showing a very simple example that's a
vector add example. It's element wise
vector add. So we add each element
together to get a result. And if you
write a C program, I think you should be
rather familiar with this type of
program. Even if you have never written
a C program before, you should probably
can understand this syntax. Even if you
have write Python only write Python
before, it just syntax is slightly
different. But there's a for loop start
they say okay n equals to a just eight
elements. Then floating point arrays a,
b, and c. Then we do a element wise
vector operation C= A + B. Then uh
from i= to zero i smaller than n i ++
then we add each numbers together then
at the end we use the result we print
the result then we free up the data that
we allocated this a very traditional C
program right then the core part is this
for loop that we repeatedly doing one
thing now what's the characteristics of
this
uh for loop the most important part is
the calculation of each data point is
independent. It doesn't matter which one
we calculate first. We can always
calculate the first one and the second
one. So they're independent. If they're
independent, we call this is a
particular pattern
that is called embarrassingly parallel
program. So what is in paral
embarrassingly parallel? That means it's
just so easy to parallel par paralyze
this program because every element is
independent from each other right so
this is called embarrassingly parallel
program then if we see this pile program
we're pretty much sure if the data size
is good enough then we can use a GPU to
improve the performance and for most of
the case the our program are not
embarrassingly parallel then that will
require some techniques to make the
program parallel but actually in our
real world lots of programs are
embarrassingly parallel.
So let's see how we can parallelize this
program in um C. Then in C we basically
use this library or this technique
called P threads. Then we can start
multiple threads to write a program.
Right? So how we started the beginning
is exactly the same. And we start n
threat
here. We only describe we only
uh declare these threads at this moment
and in a for loop we create the threads
right we create these threads and which
thread it is and what's the function and
this a function pointer and what are the
arguments that points to that pass to
the thread
then so here is launch one thread per
data element and here is the thread
program. So if you look at this thread
program,
it describes the behavior of one thread,
right? It describes the behavior of one
thread. So we first get argument, then
we get t arrow i, t do i. So we get
which particular element it is. So the
thread need to have some self awareness
so that it needs to know which thread it
is, which data needs to process. Then we
do CI equals AI plus BI and we return.
Now we're good to go. Okay, good to
return.
So
at the end we need to join so that we
guarantee that all these programs are
completed because the main thread is
keeps going and if we don't synchronize
at this point we may just fall through
then when we use the result the result
may not be ready. Then we can get some
garbage data. Okay. So, uh
on piece of paper this is a good design
because we can paralyze execution of
every element and in reality this is a
terrible design.
Why? What's the problem with this
program?
>> Yeah. Well, it's ultimately going to be
slower because the task that each thread
is doing is simpler than all of the
tasks you're doing just to create that
thread. Yeah.
>> Right. It's just one array like one
element of one vector. So it's uh if you
wanted to parallelize the smarter you
could say okay each thread does like
some number of elements of a very long
array like it does 4,96 or something
intelligence.
>> That's right. So there are too many
threads then allocating one thread takes
there's some overhead. There's some
calculation instruction level overhead.
There's also some memory overhead. If we
have a really large array
the number of thread may just explode
your memory. So don't do this. Then
think about how many cores you have.
Then allocate basically roughly the same
number of threads as the number of cores
you have. Definitely no more than two
times of the uh your the number of your
cores in your system. Then allocate a
group of them and run them together
there. Okay. So but I'm just want to
show you this is the typical way that
how we think about a parallel program.
So what's the key point here is
basically we need to find the
embarrassingly parallel patterns or find
the independence then no matter if it's
CPU or DPU we want to find output take
the output then we want one we consider
one task is to calculate one piece of
output then we can paralyze the
computation of each output element
okay
then let's talk about the need of
parallel programming And
when we talk about parallel programming,
we have to talk about matrix
modification.
So why matrix multiplication is so
important
is because machine learning, right? So
we all know machine learning in machine
learning program
this this is my personal brief
estimation. Okay, I would say 70 or 90%
of calculations in machine learning
workloads are pretty much matrix
modification or similar operations.
Think about a fully connected layer like
neuronet network. A fully connect layer
is a matrix modification. Then a
convolutional layer even a convolutional
layer they convert doing some operation
called image to call they to convert a
image into a matrix so that they can use
matrix to perform the operation. Why
they just don't do convolution directly
with a loop? Because our devices are so
optimized for matrix modification. So
doing the extra step to do the
conversion is actually worth the time.
The overall performance will even be
higher. So convolution then transformer
you probably haven't heard of
transformer. Transformers
a major part of transformers are fully
connected layers. the feed forward
network FFN right FFN are matrix
modification because it's pretty much
basic neuronet networks so it's matrix
modification again now if you look at
matrix modification how we get this
point how we get this point
we have this where's the point it's on
the other side
goes with the mouse point so how do we
calculate this one you have Use the
column from the or the first column
choose.
>> Yeah. Or the first
it is the
row here and the column here. Right. So
then okay
then the question is does the
calculation of the second point really
matters from the first one? No. Right.
It's totally independent.
So we can just calculate the first one
and the second one together at the same
time.
And so can we say this is an
embarrassingly parallel program? Uh
pretty much at this stage yes. Then if
we dive deep into GPU programming almost
we never want to write in that way
because we want some extra performance
optimization because if we calculate the
first one we're loading the whole row.
Now, if we're calculating the second
one, we're still loading the whole row.
If you just consider they're totally
independent, we're loading this row
multiple times, which is something that
we don't want. But at this stage, don't
think about that level or don't think
about automization. Like if you just
want to write a GPU program, just one
right to calculate one cell. Okay, then
that's good enough. So if you consider
the output matrix can be very large for
machine learning algorithms that there
are a lot of opportunities to do this
parallel execution. Right? So
today if you do some GPU research
you should always verify if the GPU
architecture improvement can improve
matrix modification performance. If your
design can improve matrix modification
performance by 10% but slow down
everything else by 5% you're very good.
If you improve the performance by 10% of
everything else but slow down matrix
modification nobody will accept that
one. Okay. So matrix modification is
just that important for GPU.
Okay then let's talk about GPUs. GPUs
are originally designed for graphics,
right? So how graphics works? Graphics
works in this way. So user when user
write a GPU program, let's just say it's
a 3D game, right? How they define
something? They define, okay, here's a
body, here's a car or something, right?
An object. Object is organized in a mesh
of triangles.
Just triangles, right? lots of vertices
then connected with triangles. So we use
a process called vertex shading. When we
talk about shading or shader, shader is
basically a something. I just call it
something because if you talk about
software is a piece of software that can
compute. Now if we talk about hardware
is a piece of hardware that can compute.
So I'm just saying it's something
something that computes the color or
other properties. Say where it is the
lightning lightning strength or how far
away from the camera this element is of
something. What is this something? This
can be a vertex or a pixel. Okay. So so
we calculate the
we calculate the color of everything,
right? Then we do a rasterization.
Basically we convert into pixels. Then
we do a pixel shading. We calculate
number of p the colors of each pixel.
and we combine them together and we
render the final output.
Okay, so if you consider how many
vertices are there, it really depends on
the game. If it's a Minecraft game is
probably not a lot of uh vertices, uh if
it's a like a really high-end 3D games,
really resource demanding, it can go up
to 10 million or even more vertices.
Now, about the number of pixels, that's
a relatively fixed number for at least
for this stage output, right? Even for
this stage output, there may be wasted
pixels because it's hiding behind. But
for the final output, it depends on if
you want to render like 1080p or 4K um
gaming quality. In this case is a few
millions.
Then we in recent years if we're talking
about rendering have to talk about
retracing and how retracing works is
basically we have the object or a group
of a lot of objects in the scene and we
have a camera. What we're doing is we
cast the rays out out of this camera
then we calculate the refraction and
reflection on the objects right we
calculate say it first go through a
pixel in this needs to go through this
pixel then it goes here then probably
reflects to a light or it probably
reflects not to a to a to a point that
is not a light right so we just scan the
whole thing by generating
many many rays then to calculate let's
say eventually how many rays can you
land on a light source and how strong
the light source is right then
eventually we can infer how bright a
pixel is right so other than the super
large number of vertices there and
triangles there we have 10 to 100 rays
per pixel per frame right so one frame
if you consider Consider if you want to
play a game at 60 Hz at 60 frames per
second. So you need a large number of
rays per pixel so that this pixel can be
realistic. Then so that's a few million
rays and just consider every ray you go
there you probably need to consider oh
is it
contacting this surface is it contacting
that triangle. So you need lots of
calculation. So lots of calculations and
if you consider this type of calculation
every calculation on the vertices and on
the pixels are independent from each
other right and every ray here in this
case are independent from each other. So
rendering is intrinsically
embarrassingly parallel program. So GPUs
are originally designed for
embarrassingly parallel program. it can
just calculate these things
many many times with much larger
throughput with much larger computing
capability. So then it was machine
learning people that they really really
need matrix modification and high
computing power and they realized their
programs are highly repetitive. So they
just starting from around 10 around 2010
then they start to use GPUs to run
programs. Then at the early days there's
no compute program. There's no
programming framework that is just
designed for computing purposes. They
just use these type of shaders as if
they're calculating colors.
Then later on they really by that time
they use OpenGL to calculate machine
learning programs. Then it's really
awkward by that time. Then CUDA comes
out, open CL comes out, G computing
frameworks come out. It's just more
natural today to use GPUs to write
general purpose computing cap
applications. So everything that we talk
about GPU are general purpose computing
in this course.
We're done with rendering.
Okay, let's talk about GPU programming.
Still many things before we can really
talk about GPU programming.
Uh so first thing is we need to talk
about this concept called host and
device. So what is a host program? A
post program is a pro piece of program
that runs on the CPU. Just consider the
Pthread program. It's the main function
is the host program is it's what
bootstraps the whole program initialize
the data and eventually consumes the
data. Now on the other side we have the
device program. It's a program that runs
on the GPU side. Okay. So why we need a
hostel program and a device program. So
GPUs although they are very powerful
they are really limited
right they cannot really access hardware
um network hard drive they cannot
respond to or take in user input and the
generated user input to anything else
other than the screen. Okay, they need
CPU to tell what to do. The CPU needs to
coordinate and the GPU is super slow in
single pro single thread program. So
sometimes your program really have no
single thread parts. So you still want
to move those parts to the CPU side and
CPU today is actually very powerful.
Wasting the CPU resources is a waste. So
TPU
CPUs are only accelerator.
Okay. So don't think they are powerful
devices that they can do anything.
They're actuators. What are
accelerators? That means a CPU offload
part of the program that is really
computer intensive. Then the CPU can
still do it. It's just not fast enough.
Then the CPU offload that part of
program to the GPU side. So the GPU can
run it faster. Okay. So there's
offloading process. GPU is only
accurator.
So
how we can program host and devices?
Like we said before, there are a few
programming frameworks. There are even
more things these days. CUDA is Nvidia
only. Nvidia started CUDA and CUDA is
the most important resources for Nvidia
today. Um
people use Nvidia devices mainly because
of CUDA. It's a very very mature easy to
use. still not very easy to use but
better than other things uh in ecosystem
there are profilers debuggers and many
many other tools
um so the host is pretty much a regular
C or C++ and the device can be CUDA C is
a C like code then just don't think CUDA
is only about C C and C++ kuda can only
can also support for
you may think why for Okay,
then you probably underestimate how many
people are still writing Fortune. Then
lots of my collaborators and friends
like especially people from NASA write
like the weather forecast programs um
high performance computing applications
they still use for and they really use
like for so
for can paralyze for programs.
Um then open CL open CL comes out pretty
much around the same time when KOD is
out like around 2010 2011 2012 in that
uh that erum it's an open start standard
then a lot of companies support it uh
mainly it's supported by AMD but it's
interesting that open sale trademark is
owned by Apple but Apple
Apple somehow supports open sale but Not
never very well. Okay. M Apple, what's
the program framework for metal?
I I said it.
So metal is the programming framework
for Apple, right? So Apple has their own
programming framework other than open
sale and is tightly integrated with
their ecosystem. And if you have program
open, I I learned the GPU programming
with open sale. Now I know CUDA. I never
want to go back to Open Cell anymore.
It's very verbose, very annoying.
Then AMD deprecated open sale and start
to write something called heap. They I
guess they really wanted to use kuda
directly. But because it's owned the the
the intellectual probably owned by
another company, they just cannot use
kuda again. So they
started something called heap. So heap
is very very similar to kuda
that if you know how to write kuda
program pretty much you know how to
write hip program it's just a search and
replace thing and actually
provides a program called hippify it can
automatically convert koda program to
heap then these days with generi
probably you don't need hippify anymore
then generi can do converting even
better
okay so three main programs program
framework here but there's something
more
have you heard of Triton
so Triton is a programming framework for
uh developed by Meta
then it's a programming framework
intentionally designed for machine
learning algorithms like matrix
multiplication style programs and in
Python
So in Python that means it's much easier
to program and it's called a tile based
programming language. Okay. So if you're
writing something for machine learning
that if you want to write a kernel on
your own I highly recommend you learn
Triton. Okay check Triton see if it's a
better choice. Then it has many useful
features like uh performance automatic
performance optimization. it will test
the different styles um of how these
kernels are compiled to a GPU program on
this particular GPU then select the best
one to run there. Okay, these features
are impossible for CUDA. Um but we're
not going to talk about Trident. We're
going to focus on CUDA for this course.
Um but if you write a GPU program today,
definitely consider Triton. Okay. And
even if you know Triton, you probably
need to understand some basic things
from CUDA. The basic concepts from CUDA.
Okay. Then talking about memory model
then how memory works. So for CPU, if
you have built a computer before, if you
have a CPU, you need to buy
memory on your own, right?
So memory you buy
on your own are called DIM M
um
I really want to call it direct insert
memory module but it's still
I I don't remember what's the I there
the deal here means the pins are on the
two side of the bottom on the PC bus
here so the pins are on two side
previously is Sim M that means it's on
only on one side
then DDR don't get confused with DDR and
DIM DDR stands for double data rate
okay
RAM is read access memory so what is
double data rate that means it can
perform read and write
can per perform read and right operation
on both the rising edge of the clock and
the down edge of the clock. So you can
do two actions per clock cycle.
Okay, this is DDR. Then DDR are
typically used for CPUs.
Then for GPU, then the story is a little
bit more complex. Then if we take a G
GTX 1590 GPU and we take the shell off,
what do you call this?
This is a PCB, right? Printed circuit
board. Although you probably cannot see
the board anymore because it's full of
devices, but this is the PCB. Then the
GPU is very clear. It's the biggest
part.
So, by the way, what's the difference
between this one and this one?
They're both GTX 1590.
Yeah.
Cooling. Yes. Uh cooling is different.
This this one if you cannot you cannot
see from outside there are two fans this
one had three fans but most importantly
this is produced by Nvidia
okay this is produced by Asus so it's
just a different manufacturer so Asus
basically buy this thing the chip there
it buys the chip from Nvidia and produce
they have their own PCB they have their
own shell they have their own cooling
solution so the chip are pretty much the
But the external solutions are
different. So they may have different
performance, slightly different
performance due to probably more
powerful cooling and slightly different
frequency setup, but they're essentially
the same chip, same very similar
product. So they may sell at different
prices.
So
this is the chip, right? And where's the
memory?
Yeah. Those
are the chips surrounding the main
memory, the the main chip, right? Those
are a lot of chips. So why there are so
many? Because they wanted to run in
parallel, right? Read data and write
data in parallel so that they can
provide the throughput.
So what's the technology here is still
basically double rate run double data
rate run
but GDDR is optimized for GPU or
graphics.
This is GDDR memory. GDDR memory are
separate chips that also even this is
produced by Nvidia. A media buy from
other vendors.
Okay.
Okay. So this is H100.
Where's the memory?
How many memory modules are there?
So who say these are memories?
Now who say these are memories
six piece of memories.
Okay. One two two versus one. Okay. The
correct answers are the correct answer
is the six units are memories.
Okay. So I don't have this but this is a
rather advanced packaging
solution.
Now how this packaging works is
you can say this is a chiplet
technology. What is a chip light?
Chiplet is basically in one product we
have multiple chips. Now multiple chips
in this particular case there's only one
GPU chip but there are six memory chips.
And so how does chiplet technology works
is on the bottom this is called a
substrate or interpos
substrate is the base of the
semiconductor right is in the
manufacturing they just call it
substrate sometimes there's a separate
interposer layer but I will just write
this as substrate or interposer
interposer
Okay. So they put chips on top of it.
But at the bottom of chip there are
pins.
Okay. Then these are HBM memories.
Now HBM memories are very special
because HBM memories are stacked. Unb
high bandwidth memories are stacked.
Okay.
So
why H100 use HPM but GTX 5090 use GDDR?
As the name suggest this one has higher
bandwidth
but two cost two cost in two different
aspects. First thing is the latency for
high bind with memory is higher. So it
takes longer time for the data to
return. It's nerve just need to go up
and get the data and return. Okay. And
the protocol are slightly different. So
the latency for HBM are are
higher. The second cost is HBM is super
expensive.
So they can only afford it in the the
most high-end compute oriented GPUs. For
GDDR,
it's have some balance in the compute in
the latency and the throughput. So it's
optimized for graphics. In graphics, you
really need to consider latency, right?
Because if you really want to see that
frame in one over 60 um hertz, right?
You really want to see that frame on
time. If it's not rendered on time, then
it's not useful and at all. So here are
the memory unit. Okay, but the main
story is the CPU memory and GPU memory
are totally different things and they're
not together. If they're not together,
we just simply write GPU memory. That
means we need to do a memory copy. we
need to the CPU will prepare the data
copy that memory to the GPU side GPU
perform the calculation and once it's
done then put the memory back to the CPU
side and for a machine learning
algorithm if you think the most of the
data are the uh the the weight or the
parameters of a model right so the at
the beginning you can copy the data to
the GPU site and then stay there then it
just Let's say LM right the parameters
of the model are there then you just fit
in the user input and it will perform
one calculation then the final um the
final output can come out from the
memory copy okay
and as we said before there's one
problem
DDR are cheaper
HPM if you really want the high
bandwidth are very expensive. So don't
expect GPU to have super high memory,
super large memory. So what's the
largest memory for GPU today?
How large is the largest GPU memory?
Uh 64 is close. The correct answer
should be 80 GB
for H100 GPU. So the the range
estimation is pretty good.
So 80 GB of memory. Then if you consider
some models have 700 billion parameters,
right? That means pretty much we have no
way to put those models in one GPU. What
do we do? We have to use multiple GPUs.
So today one server may have four GPUs
or even eight GPUs. Then it's not really
sometimes it's really not because we
need a lot of computing power. is really
because we need the memory capacity
before LM era that's hard to imagine
because by that time GPU memory is not
the limiting factor. Uh in 2015 I was
using high-end GPUs with 4 GB of memory.
Today 80 GB is not good enough.
Okay. So this is how GPU works and TPU
memory. to solve this memory problem.
Then this window start to create unified
memory system. Then GH200 is one of the
GH200 is Grace Hopper. The immediate
name is Grace Hopper because the CPU
die. The CPU chip is called Grace chip.
Then the GPU is the hopper chip. Right?
So the gracehopper then you can see the
CPU may have some memory on the side but
the GPU may have the memory here. So
it's not a pure CPU and GPU unified
memory system but their addressing
system are unified. So the GPU can
theoretically accessing the CPU memory
directly but probably at a higher cost.
Then AMD MI300A is another GPU that you
can see this is a more fundamental
chiplet technology. So what is chiplet
technology? AMD is very good at GB chip
chiplet technology. Even today Nvidia is
not really using chiplet technology.
Right? So AMD is having six CDs. They
they don't call it GPUs. They call it
the accelerator compute accelerated
compute die and CCD is
core chiplet die. So basically those
this red part is the CPU and the blue
part are the GPUs.
Okay. And where's the memory? It's
basically here on the side. Okay. So AMD
has a more fundamentally unified system
than although there are still some numa
effect. What is numa effect? Numa stands
for non-unifor
memory
access
non-uniform memory access is actually a
very very interesting
research topic and it's always a
research hot topic that say this CPU
dice may access this part of memory
faster because it's physically closer
right so if this part of this GPU wants
to access the data here then it takes
longer time then there's always a
problem that where you put your compute
then where you put your data and it's
always research questions
okay then if we talk about unified
memory we also have to talk about Apple
so this is Apple M3 Ultra
And it's just a little bit hard to tell
which part is the CPU and which part is
GPU. I guess the top part is the CPU and
bottom part is the GPU. Then the the
memory are not integrated and they're
not HBM. They're not DDR. They are a
Apple adaptation of low power LP DDR but
Apple just change it totally change it.
So it's not a standard. Then they produc
in one package.
They they're also not using something
like a interpolter. They just use thing
connections wire connections across the
it's not even on a PCB but it's not also
not on these type of things. So Apple is
always doing Apple things. Then
this is also a pure uniform
memory system. Right? So CPU and GPUs
are all together.
So what's the another advantage of
unified memory system is that we don't
really need to specify oh this GPU this
part of data wants to allocate on GPU
side. This part of data on the CPU side
and we also don't need data movement. We
don't need memory copy. We just do a
maloc
regular CPU maloc then we can use it on
the GPU side. Okay.
So then let's see.
Okay, for unified memory, we can talk a
little bit more on unified memory. So
there are different type of unified
memory. So even today just regular
Nvidia GPUs, they support unified
memory.
Uh
even regular Nvidia could support
unified memory when their unified memory
is managed behind the scene. So what's
happening is let's say the GPU right the
GPU wants to access a piece of data then
they're doing a address translation
process we'll talk about translate
address translation later then they
realize okay the data is not here right
the page is not here what they do is
they can allow two different things to
happen they can just say oh here's you
want this data let's just give it to you
then this is happens at the granularity
of a cach line so typically 64 byt or
128 byt Right? A very small granularity.
But if you consider PCIe
latency, that's thousands of cycles just
to get one piece of data. Thousand of
cycles. Another way is even more
drastic. They say, "Oh,
this GPU really wants this data again."
So moving providing this data from
remote again and again, it's not very
efficient. We should move the whole pole
data to the destination, right? to to
the GPU side. So it's a page migration.
So we migrate a page. Typically page are
CPUs are used four kilobytes on GPUs it
can be 16 kilobytes or even larger. Then
they migrate whole page to the GPU size.
But if you consider migration, migration
is actually very complex. Then lot of
things need to be paused and reset. Then
the data copy takes even longer time. So
it's a higher cost. So the eventually
the driver and hardware decide if they
it worth the effort to really do the
data copy the page migration to the GPU
side. So if you say there's real page
migration, there's real data copying
happens. I would say a more precise way
to say is page migration or data
migration.
Okay. I don't see in product devices
that they really allow something like
duplication. When you say copy, it's a
duplication. So this piece of data
resides in two different locations. No
duplication, just data is moved. So it's
destroyed on the on the source side.
So on GH200 probably is more likely to
take the first way because they think oh
the bandwidth and the link between the
CPU and GPU are so good that we can just
just access the data. But I guess
there's still migration happening in
GH200 because you can see there are
still different technologies for the
memory, right? But for Apple and for
AMD, it's more likely to be really
accessing the destination directly. Um
they say just no page migration
happening. They say if this core if this
GPU core needs to access data here, they
just access just go through this memory
interface on the side that the memory
interface on the side at this point and
directly access memory. So the CPU and
GPU just share the bandwidth. there's
really no difference between the CPU
memory and GPU memory.
Okay, so different product may have
different solutions to address unified
memory. Then from discrete a media GPUs
to GH200, Mi300A and IPO 3 Ultra is on a
spectrum from the most dis disagregated
way and the most aggregated way to
manage unified memory.
Still today if you write something like
uh today if you have a device like
there's a few two high-end CPUs and
eight high-end GPU 8 H100 for example,
you probably never want to use unified
memory because the performance is still
terrible. For Apple M3 Ultra, you
probably should use unified memory
because there's no performance
difference. And if you do memory copy,
there's a duplicated data. So it waste
waste the memory. Okay. So Mi3 Ultra is
actually quite interesting. MI300 MI3
Ultra has the largest one has 512 GB of
memory which is much much higher than
what we talk about the 80 gigabytes of
H100, right? And also Mi M3 Ultra Max
Studio is about half the price of H100.
So it depends on what you want to do. So
for memory intensive workload and
if you really require a lot of memory
capacity but memory bandwidth is not
that important buying M3 ultra to do
like inference for you something like
deep six uh 60 661
billion parameter model doing inference
the M M3 Ultra is probably a good choice
if you want to do training still go with
AMIA or AMD GPUs.
because training probably needs more
memory bandwidth.
Okay.
Okay. Let's talk about vector at in not
something exciting but just program.
Okay. I put P thread on the left and the
CUDA program on the right. And we can
see they're very similar. At the
beginning we include so in P thread we
include P thread and it al should also
includes the standard standard IO and
here it includes CUDA runtime which
replaces the P thread. And let's see how
we write the
kernel code. I call it the thread code
or the kernel code.
It's vector add right? This is a vector
add thread and then here we just call it
a vector add. Then there's a modifier or
descriptor of this function name
underscore underscore global
whenever you see two underscore before
and two underscore after that's a kuda
preserved
keyword
global means it can either run on a
device or can run on a CPU okay and can
be launched as a kernel
then okay then we have parameter list
and pthread is much more annoying it can
only accept the one argument thread. Uh
CUDA is more smart that we can accept
the A B C and there's actually N the
total size of the array
but the screen is not wide enough so
it's not included.
Now on this side
we need to build a self awareness which
what is the ID thread ID right who am I
on this side we also need a thread ID T
ID we'll talk about this calculation
later but here basically this T equ is
equivalent to the I on the other side
okay now we do a boundary check we'll
talk about why boundary check is
necessary here then they say there maybe
more threats than n right? So extra
thread simply do not do anything but it
will perform CT ID equals AT ID plus BT
then it will uh
externally
okay it's a cool program is rather
straightforward at this stage
on the CPU side at the beginning there's
nothing special we have a data we we
have the data have pointers arrays but
remember we're doing memory copy right
so we have need to have multiple data
pointers so for ABC sometimes you can
see uh pointer start with H that stands
for host right so but here we just name
it at ABC as a convention if a pointer
start with D that means these pointers
are supposed to be allocated on the
device side then we use regular maloc to
allocate the data and initialize the
data okay now Here this is something
that only exists on the CP on the GPU
side on CUDA side that we have CUDA. So
when you if we use CUDA this data will
be allocated on the GPU side not on the
CPU side.
Then we do CUDA memory copy
CUDA memory copy.
Um so there are a few parameters right
those are the first one is the
destination da is the destination then a
is the source then
how how many bytes that we want to move
and multiply by size of float float is
single point four byte or 32 bit numbers
at the end we need to specify what's the
direction this case is called memory
copy host to device later Turn around.
You can see is device to host. It's
copying data back.
>> Yeah.
Um
very likely if you directly write into
DIBDC you will get a second.
Okay. Then we launch the kernel. which
started thrice.
Here we have a special syntax that use
this three triangle bracket.
Okay, so it requires two extra
parameters. One is called the number of
blocks or I I just call it kernel size
and the RSM is the block size. We'll
talk about that later. But when they
multiply together, they just equals to
the total number of threads that we want
to launch.
Okay,
block using the design of block is
something that GPU is constrained by the
hardware capability that they have to
introduce this awkward concept called
block. I guess they really don't want to
introduce this concept block concept
because it's add one extra layer of
complexity, right? But they just have to
let user to define what's the block
size. We'll talk about why blocks are
used next time on on Thursday. The BABDC
and N right
arguments nothing special. So once we
call it it will start running then it
will automatically spawn so many threads
can be millions billions of threads and
there's unlimited number of threads that
we can launch per kernel and they will
just run until the result comes out.
Okay, the result will write in the GPU
side. So here there's a equivalence that
on the CPU side we're doing a
synchronization here. So there's still
the main thread, right? The main thread
will keep going without waiting for the
uh sub threads to finish. So we have to
use the join method to synchronize. On
this side you can use code and memory
copy as a asynchronous synchronized
version that means this the calculation
before this point has to complete then
we can start to copy the data back. So
this is a synchronization then we can
copy the data back from DC to C.
Then we use the result in C. The extra
step for GPU is to free up the memory.
Free up the GPU memory. Now of course we
also need to free up the CPU memory.
Okay, so it's rather straightforward. I
think the only thing that I didn't
explain is the block size and the block
size and the kernel size and the um
kernel dimension stuff, right?
Any questions with this code?
Then let's talk about kernels, blocks,
and threads.
So this is a vector, the vector add
kernel. Then the first line is a very
important line that in many many GPU
programs you will see something like
this.
So a kernel is a piece of program that
describes the behavior of many many
threads and for GPUs the number of
threads can be very large and I would
say typically it's rather reasonable
at least much much more reasonable to
write this type of GPU program to
calculate one piece of data per thread.
Still as we discussed on the CPU side,
one thread has extra overhead. At least
this calculation is not free. If you do
this calculation only do this
calculation and if condition is also not
free. If you only do one calculation but
add extra calculation here, there's
still overhead. So it's still more
reasonable to at least allocate some
number of work piece of result on the
GPU side. So not only calculating one
piece of data but calculating a chunk of
data
okay but just for simp for for
simplicity let's just see this type of
GPU kernels now what is a thread a
thread is an independent program that
ths that runs in parallel right so that
means uh T right T in thread one and T
in thread two must be different so the
numbers in the variables that may have
the same name but they have different
values.
Now how we can launch a kernel is launch
a kernel? We we have this specific word
called launch a kernel not call a
function or some invoke a function is
launch a kernel. Launch a kernel
function is basically calling a GPU
program or calling a GPU function from
the host using this syntax.
Okay. So we need to decide how many
threads that we need to have. That's the
first thing we need to consider and
typically that's your the number of
output element but sometimes we also
typically write in a way or fix the
number of threads let's say if your GPU
can run 4,000 thread at a time you know
we just just have 4,000 threads then let
each thread to do more things that's
also very common way and in my previous
profiling fix the thread implementation
can be a few times faster than the
number of um than just to have the
necessary number of thread
as your output element. It really
depends on what how large is your real
calculation part, right? So this has
some this calculation has some overhead
and starting one thread has a little bit
overhead. Then if only do one thing
that's probably a waste of thread but if
the calculation is already very complex
then the overhead can be negligible then
it's not that important.
So what is a block? A block is a group
of thread that can synchronize and
communicate.
So that means
this hints that threads outside one
block cannot synchronize and cannot
communicate. That means in GPU you not
always never write this type of program.
What type of program?
Uh in one you write while
a
equals to zero. Wait
then do something.
Then on another thread you write a
program here. Say
do something
do B and this is do A then A equ= to 1
then do C.
Okay in CPU this is rather common right?
We just say oh we have to finish one
task then set a flag then decide read a
flag then we continue going right we
have to wait the result comes out so
that we can keep doing calculation in
CPU this is rather common in GPU this is
this can only happen within one block
okay so don't expect one thread can tell
another thread something now if you
really need to do this what do you do?
Stop the kernel and start a new one. So
global synchronization can only be
completed
at the kernel boundary. There's no way
that one thread can wait for another
thread. We'll talk about there's it's
because of some hardware constraint that
this has to be implemented.
This has to be prevented. Okay. So
communication can only happens within
one block. Then the typical block size
is 32 64 1024 and we'll talk about this
later. So number of blocks is basically
the ceiling of threads divided by block
size. So if you need 1 million thread
and divided by 1024 then that means you
need 1024 blocks.
Okay.
So because in Nvidia in CUDA you can
only launch the number of threads that
as a multiple of block your block size.
So block all the blocks are full blocks
in CUDA that that means you have to have
this boundary check you have to do this
condition there so that you don't access
out of the boundary.
Okay.
Then indices where the indices are here.
There are three indices that we used at
this point. Thread index is the index
within the block. So it can be maximum
1024.
Uh
block dimension is what's how large is
each block.
It can be 32 64 and 1024. It can
actually be any number smaller than the
24 but it doesn't make much sense if you
select other numbers.
Then block index is which block it is
first block, second block and third
block and so on.
So block index multiply by block
dimension. That's the
total number of threads before your
current block plus a thread offset and
gets a unique global ID of your thread.
Okay, that's how you calculate this T
ID.
So I think that explains all the details
of this vector add kernel. Okay,
then we're going down to hardware. So I
think I basically explained how a GPU
program is written and you see another
GPU programming course. You should learn
advanced GPU programming techniques in
other courses but then we're soon going
to the hardware the implementation how
the hardware can support this type of
program. So there's a terminology called
SIMD, single instruction, multiple data
or sometimes called SIM T. Let's talk
about this um classification of
hardware.
The first the most simple type of
hardware is single instruction single
data. Then if we fill this um
coordinates
or classification, we have single
instruction, multiple data. Then on the
other side, we have multiple
instruction, single data. And finally we
have multiple instruction multiple data.
What does that mean? So let's see
examples. A CPU single core is basically
what we say a single instruction single
data right we have add instruction then
we have we add just simply add two
numbers together and get one result. So
one instruction to process one piece of
data.
When you think of instruction multiple
data that means we do an add operation.
an add operation is actually adding
multiple numbers together but we only
say oh there's only one add instruction
multiple instruction single data is
pretty much only in the theory I don't
know any real hardware that implements
this multiple instruction multiple data
is typically multiore CPUs or just
multiple devices they're just running to
different things okay
So
let's say let's see how it works. Let's
say add instruction for CPU. Then we
have this instruction called add R5, R
six, R seven. R5, R six, R seven are
registers are
flip-flops that storing the data. The
CPU when say R5 in CPU that means it's
only one register.
There's only one piece of only one
value. Two values add the third value
when on GPU what we're doing is we say
do add always add in
array of them. So every calculation is
in an array that means this is R5 right
in this thread R5 may have value one
then R5 may have value two and so on.
Then this R six may have different
values. then the result may be different
values.
Okay.
Then the advantage is for GPU is it's
more efficient in terms of comput
computing because you think this issuing
process issuing decides which
instruction to run right issuing is
actually quite complex because we need
to load this instruction from the
memory. Then we need to decode it and
decide which to run. It's a complex
process. Now if we have this whole
process that only calculate one piece of
data is a waste of resources right so
similarly to the concept of like having
fewer threads but to do more calculation
GPU cares about calculation so GPU wants
to maximize the utilization of the ALUS
the AL user or arithmetic logic unit are
the combination logic can really
calculate the data question.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'll talk about that later.
Let's consider CPU the CPU here in a
traditional CPU way.
So,
uh issue has overhead. So, it's better
utilization of the calculation the ALOU.
So, the design philosophy is CPU is
optimized for latency. So we want to
calculate one result as fast as possible
but GPU is optimized for throughput. I
can wait for one piece of data to come
out but I want to have a lot of data to
be processed in a set the same amount of
time.
Okay then talk about this then you need
to consider that means if I'm executing
one add operation there are multiple
threads there right? So in this case
there are six thread that this six
thread must all do add operation. They
cannot do different operations different
instructions at the same time. So what's
that concept? That concept is called a
warp.
Okay. In a media terminology is called a
warp. In AMD terminology is called a
wavefront.
I guess I'm going to use a media
terminology today. then use AMD
terminology on Thursday. That's it. So
that you get familiar with both. Yeah,
it's it's because mainly I'm more
familiar with GPU programming, CUDA
program, but more familiar with AMD uh
architecture. So a warp is a group of
threader that runs in lock step. What
does mean in lock step? That means if
they move forward one foot, they have to
move forward the same foot. Means if
they do add operation all these 32
threads have to do the same add
instruction.
Okay. Lock step means they just do the
same instruction. So I only decode one
instruction. I decode it. I issue it. I
run that. Then 32 operations are
performed. Okay. So really low overhead
on the issue side and really high power
on the computer side. Then the number of
warps are means different things. Then
this 32 thread on Nvidia, 64 thread on
AMD GCN and CDN GPUs and on newer AMD RN
GPU they could also go back to 32
thread. Okay, there's some design
philosophy between behind 32 or 64 where
sometimes we can even propose 128 but
there's always a trade-off
talk about that later. So just do some
calculation. So how many words are there
in a block? So if a block
so levels right kernel block warp thread
four levels kernel block warp thread
okay
one thread 32 thread forms a warp.
Okay 32 thread forms a warp.
Then in this case if one block is 32
thread then there's one warp per block.
In the largest case
32 warp per block if there are 10 24
threads.
Okay simple multiplications just
multiply this number by 32 you get the
number blocks. Worp is a programmer
transparent concept. A programmer
doesn't really know the existence of
warps. That's why I explained at the
architecture side of the teaching of the
lecture from when we write a program
only care about blocks. We don't care
about warps.
Okay. But when you decide the warp sizes
or block sizes, why you started with 32?
You never want to have two thread per
block. That means you still need one
warp. In that case, only two threads are
running. The other threads are wasted.
So there's no point to have smaller
blocks. So a typical block is like 256
that level.
Okay. So but at least never go down with
32 and always be a multiply of 32
threats per block. That's why that's
because the warp is limiting the
granularity there.
Okay.
So th and one word are bundled together.
they always execute the same instruction
and talk about SIMD or SIMD. It's two
terminology. If you say GPU is SIMD,
nobody will really argue with you too
much. But if you want to be more
precise, people also call it SIMT.
What's the difference between CIMD and
SIMT then suggested like a CPU also have
vectorzed instructions, right? So, but
CPU works more like in this way. It has
some in most of instructions are not
vectorzed only some specific calculation
are vectorized. So vector vectorzation
happens sparsely
right. So in this case we call this
instruction or cmd instruction
in GPU is slightly different. GPU works
in this way. Every instruction is
paralyzed
at least the most of instructions are
paralyzed. In this case we call this sim
T. So single instruction multi thread
model. Okay. Although for most of time
this is we don't really need to
differentiate these two concept that
much.